For hundreds of centuries and long after men had settled in the land masses of Europe,
Asia and Africa,
this continent was unknown to any human being.
In swamps and valleys the size of Scotland
animals unknown in Europe disturbed only each other.
Strange birds of prey wheeled safely over an empty continent.
At some point, we suppose not later than 15,000 BC,
humans drifted down from Asia and the Aleutians,
ranged the length and breadth of the Americas,
built and exhausted civilizations we know nothing about.
Today there are only a few ancient relics,
such as this one in a remote canyon of northern Arizona.
There were nations that never knew each other, five hundred languages,
tribes that worshipped a bison, or a matriarch, or the corn they grew.
There were tribes ruled by warriors;
or by women farmers;
or by sacred elders.
Tribes that had never heard of war
and tribes debauched by centuries of fighting.
Hollywood has often restaged the sight and sound of imaginary dances
but those sounds you hear are not those of 25-dollar a day Indian extras.
These are Apaches of the 1970's, for once in their history
allowing us to watch all but the most sacred moments
of an annual ceremony in which supernatural figures celebrate
the passage of their women from childhood to puberty.
So for at least 150 centuries before Yankee Doodle theirs was the American Way of Life.
But for better or worse this is what we've made of it.
And it is the past four-hundred years that we think of as the history
of the land that became the United States.
I've been discovering that history for 40 years of reading
and travel throughout the United States,
and for 20 of those years I've lived here in this apartment
which overlooks Central Park in New York City.
For most of my time as a foreign correspondent this has been my daily map of the United States
- and I mean literally a map.
I once had a secretary who was hopeless at geography and to help her -
and me find the right books,
I arranged them in this order; everything on New England is in the north-east corner.
You go right down the coast to Florida.
Across the Deep South, the South West to California.
Up to Oregon, Washington -and you have to have high boots to reach Alaska.
Now, because of a continuing interest in California history,
California tends to go half way across the country
and spill right over into Texas, rather like a Californian's mental map of the United States.
Well, we all lay great stress on our favorite states and places and people.
Don't be upset if some of yours get squeezed out.
I have a man I'm mad about -over there - Benjamin Franklin,
and I'm not sure that even he will make it.
You know, when I told an old Southerner, a friend of mine, that I was going to try
and tell my version of American history in thirteen hours, he said 'better talk fast boy'.
So we ought to begin with the simple colossal question
who was the first white man to discover America,
which incidentally was named after a Florentine business man and promoter,
who promoted himself so well as to get his first name attached to a continent,
he was Amerigo Vespucci.
He took no part in the early voyages, so who was the first?
Well, there are people who are hot for the Vikings;
now we hear that the Phoenicians were here first;
no, the Jews - who presumably took one look at New York City and beat it back to the Nile.
The records of the earliest voyages are either lost, or highly debatable.
But there was one historic expedition which is documented beyond all question.
Which is why we're going into my kitchen.
You know, some of the great explosions of history have been caused
by nothing more than the denial of a simple human need.
Like a shortage of water, or too many people in a small country, a total absence of timber,
which has plagued the Egyptians since the time of Solomon.
Today we think of these spices -pepper, paprika,
cinnamon, cloves - as no more than gilt to the lily.
But in the 15th century they were what made food edible.
They had salt but no other way of preserving food,
and even in rich houses, it often came to the table putrid,
so these spices deceived the palate,
if not the digestion, which they sometimes still do.
Now, in 1453 the Turks conquered Constantinople
(our Istanbul) and it was the gateway to Asia.
So what they'd done was to shut off Europe from Asia, which was where the spices came from.
That's to say from here -from the Molucca Islands between Borneo and the Philippines.
It's astounding to me that the name -the Moluccas -is not as famous as London or Boston,
because they were the Spice Islands where the natives grew
and packed their precious products for the Turks and for Europe.
How to reach them, except through Constantinople?
There was a superb sailor, an Italian who not only thought he knew how,
but was determined to do it himself.
For many years a master mariner with the Portuguese,
who then had the best merchant marine in Europe,
he had spent much time with astronomers and mathematicians who believed,
unlike many sailors, that the earth was round.
The known map of the world was a single land mass
as flat as a pancake with the unknown Ocean Sea around it.
But if it was a sphere you could obviously sail from the Western extreme to the eastern,
to Japan, China and Indonesia, to the Indies where the spices lay.
So thought Cristoforo Colombo. This tough, passionate Christian held visionary talks with god,
but they did not cloud his instinct for ten per cent -which was what he demanded and got,
for all the loot of the lands he might discover.
After a 15 years trek around Europe, he found his sponsors in the King and Queen of Spain
who coveted the spice trade, needed gold for their dwindling treasury,
and shared Columbus's horror of the infidel Turk.
So they packed him off on his mission 'for gospel and for gold.'
And here in Barcelona harbor is a replica of the ship in which Columbus sailed,
the Santa Maria.
Today it would not be acceptable as a yacht
by any self-respecting member of the jet set.
One hundred tons only and 75 feet long,
it was not by a long shot one of the big ships of the time,
but it would have to be sturdy enough to withstand roaring storms
and quick enough to take shelter in the shallow channels of the imagined Atlantic Islands.
It was payed with pitch against barnacles,
had stones for ballast and a main mast as long as the keel.
The other two ships were smaller still.
Here in the stern is Columbus's cabin and his bed.
Incidentally he was six feet, which in those days was enormous,
and by the time he landed he must have been permanently bent over.
And here he would have his charts.
He'd been in the chart business with his brother for years
and, an odd detail about the provisions.
Naturally they carried red wine which was a standard laxative,
but two-and-a-half liters per man per day, which sounds like an awful lot.
I suppose they meant it to keep them philosophical if the worst happened.
There were forty men aboard, including a surgeon and the King's Controller of Accounts,
to keep tabs on Columbus's swindle sheets when he started to figure the cost of the gold
and the spices he was going to take.
There was a converted Jew who spoke Arabic,
which they thought was very similar to Chinese and so he'd be the interpreter.
One Portuguese, another Italian and the rest were Spaniards.
And so on the evening of the 2nd August 1492 the entire crew went ashore for confession,
received absolution for their sins,
and on the morning of the 3rd, they set sail from Palos.
They sailed all through August and September
and saw none of the islands they'd expected.
The crews grew weary, then nervous, then panicky and were close to mutiny.
Maybe the world wasn't round. Maybe they'd fall off into space.
The two other captains begged Columbus to turn back.
He had drastically miscalculated by about eighty per cent the width of the Ocean Sea,
so he faked the log by reducing the mileage they'd gone from Spain.
And to redress this deceit he tells us 'he pray'd mightily to the Lord'.
Well, by Divine Intervention -or luck - on the following day, the 12th October,
he sighted as he believed the mainland of Asia or one of its offshore islands.
We know it was San Salvador, in the Bahamas, and he went on to explore Haiti and Cuba.
Like most eager travelers, Columbus found what he was looking for.
He decided that Cuba was Japan. He was a little baffled by the absence of cities.
But there were spices, and cotton, and weird birds and coppery colored natives
who kept assuring him there were mountains of gold inland. Always further inland.
If this was so
the slaves to work the gold mines were already on hand in these peaceable natives.
He was almost convinced and like a good salesman he hurried back to Spain
with what we should call display samples of the products he'd gathered;
exotic plants, an alligator, brilliant parrots,
prize natives got up like show horses, some gold.
Columbus's sales exhibition was a total success and his next fleet was 17 ships
and fifteen hundred men, sailors, soldiers, adventurers, rushed to found gold
and silver mining colonies,
and there was a clutch of priests along to sanctify the necessary slaves.
But this time he really did find gold. And there now began the longest,
the most determined and the most brutal, gold rush in history.
If the natives were sulky or hostile they were terrified into submission
by two acts of magic that they'd never seen.
One was the firing of monster machines called cannons, and the other was the appearance -
and this always worked of living monsters called horses.
There were many brave priests along who were sickened by the outrages along the trail.
And there's an unforgettable story of a native king who was about to be burned at the stake,
and as he felt the first fires rise on his body,
he refused baptism on the grounds that he might go to heaven
'and meet there only Christians'.
Within fifty years of Columbus sighting San Salvador the Spaniards had plundered
and conquered the whole of Central America and Peru.
Now the Pope had proclaimed that everything one hundred leagues west of the Azores
belonged to Spain or her brother Portugal.
But some nations refused to bow to this proclamation, most dramatically the King of France.
"We fail", he said, "to find this clause in Adam's will".
The first French arrivals only twelve years after Columbus
were Breton fishermen working the cod banks off Nova Scotia.
But they soon came on Indians eager to barter furs for bits of metal and gunpowder,
so they abandoned the cod, penetrated the Gulf and the River St. Lawrence
and trapped and skinned every animal in sight.
These humble trappers were incidentally
putting out the tentacles of the French Empire in the north.
While down in Mexico City, Cortes,
a penniless nobleman turned soldier was crowning himself as a Mexican God.
The Spaniards were now ready to investigate their favorite myth
that to the north lay seven cities of gold.
So in 1540 another soldier,
Francisco Vasquez de Coronado, marched north to find them.
He started from Mexico with three hundred men,
a horde of Indians, hundreds of horses, mules, cattle, sheep, goats and priests.
They marched for two years going up through Arizona
and New Mexico and Texas, wheeling north-east
into the middle of the present state of Kansas.
To us their expectations seem preposterous based on a whole Spanish literature
which said that North America contained volcanoes and mermaids,
and was the place where Judas took his annual winter vacation from the fires of hell.
Also the splendid golden objects that abounded in Central America
were said to hang in the north from trees.
They found no cities, no gold, much less trees to hang it on.
Nothing but an endless lunar landscape.
But these were the rigors of the soldier's lot.
Their one consolation was that the native humans at least could be conquered and hired to serve.
But once they came on a seemingly invincible pueblo.
It was a mountain stronghold of hostile Indians, and it was called Acoma.
The first white man to see it was a scout from Coronado's expedition.
He went back and he told his commander of a 'great city in the sky'.
The strongest position he reported ever seen in the world.
The Acoma Indians have lived here for at least a thousand years.
On their sheer pathways up the rock
countless hands have worn down cracks into smooth handholds.
On such a climb an armor-clad soldier was a pretty poor match for a nimble redskin.
Coronado surveyed it from afar and gave it a miss.
To this day the elders of the Acomas,
unlike many Indian tribes, refuse to yield their ancient ways,
or to perform for the white man.
They forbid all strangers to enter or see these sacred places called Kiva.
No power lines may be laid,
no artificial heat of any kind is available even for the baking of bread,
Not for want of money but because the rock on which the city itself is built is sacred
and may not be broken or defiled in any way.
This old man, 30 miles away from motels, pizza parlors
and Jo's second-hand car lot, is adding an extra room to his house
with no help from the techniques of the American way of life.
How about the young? They look American, they talk American,
and today they are learning that their heritage is one of betrayal.
This may be the last generation willing to walk the old uncomplaining ways.
Well, this windswept fortress which is at the top of the continental divide
remained unconquered for 59 years after Coronado had seen it.
And then the Spaniards mounted a three-day and night assault and they took it.
It was a feat sufficient to provoke in a soldier-poet a still celebrated epic poem.
And certainly the Spanish took an epic revenge; six hundred prisoners, six hundred killed,
they took the leading 70 warriors and tossed them off the top of the cliff.
They bound to life-time servitude another five hundred mostly women and children.
And with the rest of the population the adult males,
they cut off one foot to discourage escape or any further military adventures.
And those who couldn't be wooed out of their own religion were literally thrown to the dogs,
or flogged into devotion to the Carpenter of Nazareth.
As usual time softens the sting of these atrocities and 30 years later a mild Franciscan priest,
Father Ramirez walked to their fortress barefoot and unarmed,
and with the single weapon of a crucifix, converted them.
And they built this church.
It was not possible to bury the dead in the solid stone.
So for over forty years the Indians brought up earth in handfuls
from the plains below to make this graveyard.
If the desert winds can leave mountains with the sheen of bones,
it's not surprising that there are hardly any trace of the Spanish marches.
But there's an amazing one. It is this towering bluff, El Morro.
Indian guides led Coronado to it when his men were fainting with thirst.
At the foot of it was this pool of pure water,
which is something that anywhere in the arid West
is likely to become a way station or a camp ground.
It's odd that the first white men on the march through America should have yielded to that
curious human itch which has afflicted tourists in the Greek Islands,
the Grand Canyon and Disneyland, to write up  their names on a stone.
It's odder still that such inscriptions should survive in a country
which tears down a skyscraper which is less than a quarter of a century old.
At any rate the first man who carved himself into immortality
and we think probably with the point of a sword -was this one; 'Paso pora qui el arrivantando'
through here passed the governor,
Don Juan de Onyate after his discovery of the Sea of the South, April 16th 1605.'
Now by the Sea of the South, he meant that he'd been as far as the Gulf of California,
and like every other Spaniard who ever saw a body of water that was seemingly endless,
he thought he'd found that passage through to the Pacific.
He did set up the first Spanish government in the South West,
and here is his palace at Santa Fe.
It was built 10 years before the Pilgrim Fathers landed on the New England coast.
For the next two hundred years these remote provinces of New Spain today's Texas,
Arizona, California -slowly developed an outpost economy throughout a burning landscape
half the size of Europe.
The Spanish had introduced two indispensable elements of Western life;
the horse and the cow.
It was the horse that had first terrified the Western Indian into submission.
It was the horse that was to set him free, and free-wheeling from Mexico to the Canadian tundra.
And the Spanish left behind in the branding signs
and the embossing of saddles a whole heraldry of ranching.
I imagine that those of us born abroad
think of a rodeo as a Western circus for the public's entertainment.
But throughout two thousand miles. the whole arc of the southwest a rodeo -
literally a round-up - is one of the timeless chores of ranching.
The word 'cowboy' is directly translated from 'vaquero'.
On this ranch in Arizona all these men speak only Spanish,
except the ranch owner and his foreman, known as the 'maja' or major domo.
And their equipment retains the Spanish names; the lariat;
the chaps they wear for protection against the desert scrub called chaperral
The purpose of the rodeo was to round up once a year
all the cattle that had run free and multiplied on the open range;
to distinguish one man's herd from another by branding the yearling calves with the owner's
initials  or emblems which were registered with the governor of each province.
By the way the word 'cinch' comes from ranching. The saddle-girth is called a cincher
and when it was securely fastened it was said to be cinched.
I don't know who said it, and it could have been me,
that a civilization is founded in a crop and survives by a code of law.
Well the Spaniards introduced many of the basic American crops;
oats, wheat. barley, oranges and they took the rudest indigenous cereal of the Indian
and they made it a staple from the Canadian border to the tip of South America -
that's maize, what is everywhere called corn.
Two thousand miles to the north and east though a very different way of life
was being developed by the tough descendants of those Breton fishermen.
They were exploring the waters and tracking down the game of that yawning stretch of forest
and tundra in - Le Canada.
Furs, especially beaver, were in fashionable demand in Europe,
and to get them the French developed an entirely new breed of explorers,
trappers and hunters,
living rough, outdoing the Indians at their own game -
so that it was said no four-legged thing is safe from a Frenchman.
These French Canadians are hunting the biggest
and most elusive of all North American deer the moose.
The man in the lead, incidentally, once had to kill a bear that was stealing his food.
He had no gun and stabbed it with a knife on the end of a stick.
So rapacious were the hunters that they had to track farther and farther into the interior
in order to find enough animals to kill.
Forsaking the familiar boats of Europe
they adopted from the Indians the canoe which was ideal,
not only for plying the wide rivers
but ferreting through the wriggling channels of the northern lakes and marshes.
♪ SINGING ♪
Only the French, it was said,
would have wanted to settle a landscape of giant lily-pads.
Certainly only they and later the Scots
would have knotted a lifeline across a continent of tundra.
One of the epic French journeys of exploration began in November 1678
when a young nobleman, Rene Cavelier Sieur de la Salle, set sail across Lake Ontario.
He was seeking a way south across the continent by water.
His boat was wrecked and in mid-winter
his expedition had to drag its equipment around Niagara Falls.
Despite many disasters, and to the wonderment of the Seneca Indians,
they managed in the spring of 1679 to build another boat
and launched it on Lake Erie, where no ship had ever sailed.
In it, La Salle sailed across the Great Lakes, over Lake Erie,
up the St. Clair, up Lake Huron, westward
into Lake Michigan.
Battling hunger and appalling weather they reached the Illinois River.
The boat sank. They met and had to fight hostile Indians,
and la Salle was plagued with debts and doubters back home.
In the winter they had to drag their supplies overland, the going so bad
that they wore out a pair of leather moccasins every day.
But eventually they reached open water on a branch of the Illinois River.
And on the 6th February 1682 they floated into the Mississippi
and fifteen hundred miles down the great river,
until after two months they reached the open sea.
On the 9th April La Salle assembled his men, raised a cross
and the banner of France, and in the name of Louis X1Vth,
he took possession of all the vast lands he had covered and called them Louisiana.
La Salle was killed on a later expedition
but in time the French built the port of New Orleans at the mouth of the Mississippi.
Yet they never domesticated the enormous hinterland La Salle had brought them.
Here is a French map of the mid-eighteenth century, 1755,
which shows what an exclusive hold the French had in the north,
what an accurate picture of what you might call lateral America.
But you see the French were just as vague about what lay to the south
and west as the Spanish had been about what lay to their north and west.
Being fishermen and trappers, the French did a fine
job of mapping this entire nervous system of the rivers,
but beyond them they simply put in the names of Indian tribes
the Miamis, the Illinois, the Sioux.
Down here in what is now the United States they did not plan colonies,
they settled allays close to the river, way stations,
or what we might call retail centers for the down river traffic,
bearing fur and hides and timber down to the port of New Orleans.
But if they found some local useful product a mineral salt,
then they would stop and make a town.
And we're in one now, at St. Genevieve, Missouri on the Mississippi,
which is one of the last to retain the flavor and the look of provincial France.
We're in the house of a French Canadian born merchant,
this is the desk where he did his accounts;
here are the steps going up to the bedroom, which was also used for winter storage.
I think this is the most characteristic French house
now remaining in the Mississippi Valley.
What the French found here was lead -veins of lead of incredible richness.
So they brought in two hundred French miners
and imported five hundred negro slaves from Santo Domingo.
And they carried the lead for shipping down the Mississippi,
across the flat lands that lay south of this city
which they called Le Grand Champ -the big field.
The French usually started with a fort and a few soldiers,
but they found this village, straggling village indefensible,
so they palisade the houses and it was everyman for himself.
However, they prospered, and they made a country town.
They brought over their missionaries and priests,
planted their familiar vines and shrubs - in fact,
imported their culture, including a useful strain  of thrift.
The first man who owned this house prospered exceedingly, a man named Louis Bolduc.
And he kept his money stored in the cellars there. One time an American merchant came through.
And they took a bet as to who was the wealthier.
When Bolduc sent for a servant and ordered up a half a bushel basket to measure his silver,
the American paid up.
Now this place, St. Genevieve, in the late eighteenth century
was a little Paris for the Mississippi Valley.
And parents with aspirations to gentility
sent their children here to learn to be good Catholics,
to learn to speak good French.
And one boy who came all the way from Pittsburgh remembered very vividly
that he had, after Sunday  mass, attended a school of manners where -
he said -we learned the two elements of true politeness;
grace and self-denial.
On the whole the French Catholic influence was instructive and benign.
It was rarely so in the Spanish south-west.
The Conquistadors had been sent as the sword of the pope.
And today in southern Arizona, the Papago Indians go off to worship
in one of the great imperial monuments left by the Spanish,
the church of San Xavier del Bac,
where primitive Indians practice the most sophisticated rituals of Europe.
A chief of the Papagos.
After four centuries both old and young are as unquestioningly devout as the soldiers
who had beaten their ancestors into a new, bizarre religion.
Neither the plundering life of the Conquistadors
nor the vigorous life of the ranchers went on for ever.
As time went on so did the mellowing of the Spanish heritage,
till by the beginning of the 19th century the Spanish were thoroughly domesticated
in this part of the world, and especially here in California.
By now the Indians had been trained to be carpenters
and farmers and blacksmiths and growers of vines.
And comfortable families not much interested in money,
raised enough cattle and enough crops for their needs,
practiced a strict but affectionate Catholic discipline on their children,
and lived in squares like these, lives that were balanced and useful and benevolent.
The Spaniards' imperial ambitions were checkmated too soon for them to build,
as the French did here in New Orleans, a full-blown capital city.
This might have been the capital of the United States
if Napoleon had not sold for cash the huge interior which La Salle had claimed as Louisiana.
But the French and then the Spanish prospered here, lawyers and bankers, merchants,
ambassadors and playboys,
maintaining their quadroon mistresses in terraced apartments
overlooking the main square.
Today New Orleans more or less incorporates as a tourist package
the French heritage in the United States.
And it is practically an obligation to abjure the hot dog for the snail.
Holiday makers troop through curio shops
which were once the homes of diplomats and opera singers.
But you won't find here reminders of the French figures who created this city
and the cities of the Mississippi Valley.
They're not much known to Americans.
We hardly know that we pronounce Arkansas ARKENSAW,
and Chicago SHICAGO, because that's the way the French said them.
We look to the north for the French contribution and think of Canada.
And Canadian history is little taught in American schools.
Consider their heroes; Pontiac, the brave Ottawa Chieftain; Cadillac,
the settler of Detroit; La Salle himself.
They are recognized only as the names of automobiles.
But in these quiet patios I'm reminded of one grand exception,
the only French god in the American Pantheon.
In the unlikely event that two hundred million Americans were ever put up
against a wall at gunpoint and ordered to name one Frenchman who had meant most to America,
I think the name would be the Marquis de Lafayette.
A young French nobleman, 19 years old, newly married,
forbidden to leave France when the War of Independence broke out,
he escaped to America. "My heart", he said, "enlisted in the cause of liberty".
George Washington was moved by his charm and bravery. He was made a Major-General,
was wounded, fought in the last engagement at Yorktown,
and was given the freedom of a grateful republic.
He went home to fight in the French Revolution
for what he believed was a similar brave cause.
He was too liberal for the Royalists, and too moderate for the Republicans,
and he was thrown into a dungeon.
His wife asked to join him there and she was allowed to.
And they stayed five years, which broke her in spirit  and in body.
They came to be buried together in a small graveyard in Paris,
and in time by their side lay their only son, George Washington Lafayette.
No country has been than France in having in the person of one man
such a permanent investment in American goodwill.
You know, when General Pershing arrived in Europe
with the vanguard of the American Expeditionary Force in 1917,
and first set foot on French soil,
he greeted the French host commander with the short sentence;
Lafayette nous voici - Lafayette we are here.
Well, since we know which of the big three,
the Spanish, the French, the British - won this continent
it seemed to me only sporting to pay an introductory tribute to the losers
who left such a large and indelible mark on this country.
And it may be some consolation to those who believe
that the meek, or the crafty, inherit the earth,
to reflect that this continent was ultimately won,
not by a race of military conquerors like the Spanish,
nor even by a nation of hunters, explorers, missionaries like the French,
but by a small handful of people from a small island in the North Atlantic
who first sailed in three ships into Jamestown, Virginia to find a home from home.